details/overview/2data.md, before:

---
title: "Data"
description: |
  PreFer uses two datasets: the LISS panel and Dutch population register data.
categories:
  - Data description
toc: true
image: ../../images/data scheme pick.png
language: 
    section-title-footnotes: References
---

This challenge uses two data sources: survey data from the [LISS panel](https://www.lissdata.nl/){target="_blank"} and linked register data from [Statistics Netherlands](https://www.cbs.nl/nl-nl/onze-diensten/maatwerk-en-microdata/microdata-zelf-onderzoek-doen/catalogus-microdata){target="_blank"} [(Bakker et al., 2014)](https://doi.org/10.3233/SJI-140803){target="_blank"}, or CBS.  

### LISS dataset

The LISS panel is based on a traditional probability sample drawn from the Dutch population register by Statistics Netherlands and is managed by the non-profit research institute Centerdata. Participants of the data challenge will use a merged dataset based on all modules from the LISS Core Study as well as the Background survey from 2007-2020.  

The [LISS Core Study](https://www.dataarchive.lissdata.nl/study-units/view/1) is a longitudinal study that is fielded each year in the LISS panel and measures the same set of variables. The Core Study includes ten modules that cover a wide range of topics from income, education and health to values, religion, and personality, including variables designed specifically to study fertility behaviour (e.g. fertility intentions). The Background survey collects basic socio-demographic information about the household. 

The dataset includes only a subsample of people aged 18-45 in 2020. The dataset is split into a train set (the outcome and predictors), available to participants of the challenge (around 70% of the whole dataset) and a holdout set for evaluation (the remaining 30% of the outcome and predictors), unavailable to the participants (see the figure below).  

__The dataset will be provided to the participants of the data challenge after sighing the user statement.__

Read further:   
- [Tips](/posts/posts/2024-03-20-prefer-datasets.qmd) for navigating the LISS datasets used in the challenge

![](/images/scheme liss.png)  



### CBS dataset

The linked register data comes from population registries of the Netherlands collected by Statistics Netherlands (CBS) (we will refer to this source as CBS data). Participants will have access to a selection of all CBS datasets. These datasets include information about marriages and partnerships, children, education, employment, income and assets, neighborhood characteristics and more, as well as social networks for the whole Dutch population [van der Laan et al., 2023](https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jcac026){target="_blank"}. Most of these datasets cover the period from 1995 to 2023, but only the data up to 2020 can be used for training.  

Based on these selected datasets, a base preprocessed dataset (mostly with the data from 2020) will be prepared and made available to the participants as a starter package along with a codebook in Dutch and English. This preprocessed file includes only our target group – people aged 18-45 in 2020 (more than 6 million people). Participants will be able to calculate additional variables based on the full longitudinal datasets and also add characteristics of their networks, using the network datasets for the linkage. The scripts with examples of how to preprocess the network datasets and calculate variables about the structure and composition of one’s networks will be provided. To allow adding the characteristics of the network and because in this phase participants will submit predictions (not only the code), only the outcome variable for the test set is held out (see the figure below).  

Additional CBS datasets (not initially available to the participants of the challenge) can be requested throughout the challenge with a short justification of why the dataset is requested. The relevant CBS datasets can be searched using the CBS [micro-data catalogue](https://www.cbs.nl/nl-nl/onze-diensten/maatwerk-en-microdata/microdata-zelf-onderzoek-doen/catalogus-microdata){target="_blank"} and [ODISSEI portal](https://portal.odissei.nl/){target="_blank"}. Data from external sources (not included in the CBS datasets) that can be linked to groups of individuals can also be uploaded if approved by CBS – for example, welfare policies by municipality.   

__NB:__ because the access to the CBS data is governed by strict rules and regulations in relation to data protection and privacy, only a limited number of participants (10-20 teams, one person per team), selected to participate in [Phase 2](/details/overview/3phases.md){target="_blank"}, will get access to the CBS data provided that they pass security checks and get approved by CBS. For those participants, the costs of access to the CBS datasets will be covered by ODISSEI. You can read about how teams will be __selected__ to participate in Phase 2 and the __conditions for accessing the CBS data__ [here](/details/overview/4submission_evaluation_winners.md){target="_blank"}.  

Read further:   
- Tips for using the CBS data [to be added]

![](/images/scheme cbs.png)

Commit message:

upd data description and FAQ

details/overview/2data.md, after:

---
title: "Data"
description: |
  PreFer uses two datasets: the LISS panel and Dutch population register data.
categories:
  - Data description
toc: true
image: ../../images/data scheme pick.png
language: 
    section-title-footnotes: References
---

This challenge uses two data sources: survey data from the [LISS panel](https://www.lissdata.nl/){target="_blank"} and linked register data from [Statistics Netherlands](https://www.cbs.nl/nl-nl/onze-diensten/maatwerk-en-microdata/microdata-zelf-onderzoek-doen/catalogus-microdata){target="_blank"} [(Bakker et al., 2014)](https://doi.org/10.3233/SJI-140803){target="_blank"}, or CBS.  

### LISS datasets

The LISS panel is based on a traditional probability sample drawn from the Dutch population register by Statistics Netherlands and is managed by the non-profit research institute Centerdata. The LISS panel started in 2007 when approximately 5000 households comprising 8000 individuals of 16 years and older were recruited. 

Members of the panel participate in ten longitudinal surveys (or [Core Study modules](https://www.dataarchive.lissdata.nl/study-units/view/1)) on ten different topics (family, health, religion, social integration and leisure, work and education, personality, politics and values, assets, income, housing). Most of these surveys are conducted annually, and some biannually. Each time, each survey measures the same set of variables.  

We merged all these surveys from 2007-2020 and selected only respondents from our target group: people aged 18-45 years old in 2020, who participated at least in one Core study survey in 2007-2020. Overall, there are ~6900 people in this group. However, most of them have dropped out of the LISS panel by 2021-2023, and because of that the outcome - getting a new child in 2021-2023 - is available only for ~1400 of them.  

We splitted all individuals for whom the outcome is available into a training set and holdout (test) set. Some respondents come from the same households, soTo avoid data leakage, we first splitted the households, and then 
To ensure independence in training and holdout data, we addressed the issue of participants from the same household by randomly assigning entire households to either the training or holdout set. We selected households where at least one member had a new child and households where no new child was born, then randomly allocated 30% of each group to the holdout set. All members of selected households were included in their respective sets, excluding those with missing outcomes. Comparisons of key variables between training and holdout sets showed similarity, ensuring robustness. It's important to note that only individuals with non-missing outcomes in the training set are comparable to the holdout set, as missing outcomes are likely non-random.

The training set is participants of the challenge (around 70% of the whole dataset) and a holdout set for evaluation (the remaining 30% of the outcome and predictors), unavailable to the participants. We added all people for whom the outcome is unknown to the training set as well. (see the figure below). *Note*:  ; see more details on the train-test split in the [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00705){target="_blank"})

There are two main sources of data on the LISS panel: the LISS Core Study and Background surveys.   


The dataset includes only a subsample of people aged 18-45 in 2020. The dataset is split into a train set (the outcome and predictors), available to participants of the challenge (around 70% of the whole dataset) and a holdout set for evaluation (the remaining 30% of the outcome and predictors), unavailable to the participants (see the figure below). 

We explain in the [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00705){target="_blank"} why the outcome is available only for ~1400 people in this target group. 

__The dataset will be provided to the participants of the data challenge after sighing the user statement.__

Read further:   
- [More detailed description](/posts/posts/2024-03-20-prefer-datasets.qmd){target="_blank"} of all LISS datasets provided for participants of the challenge  
- Some [examples](/posts/posts/2024-03-20-prefer-datasets.qmd){target="_blank"} of how to make use of these different LISS datasets
- [Tips about how to use codebooks](/posts/posts/2024-03-21-prefer-codebooks.qmd){target="_blank"} for these LISS datasets  
- More [guides](/posts/index.qmd){target="_blank"} that help work with LISS data.   

![](/images/liss_scheme_gray.jpg)  



### CBS dataset

The linked register data comes from population registries of the Netherlands collected by Statistics Netherlands (CBS) (we will refer to this source as CBS data). Participants will have access to a selection of all CBS datasets. These datasets include information about marriages and partnerships, children, education, employment, income and assets, neighborhood characteristics and more, as well as social networks for the whole Dutch population [van der Laan et al., 2023](https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jcac026){target="_blank"}. Most of these datasets cover the period from 1995 to 2023, but only the data up to 2020 can be used for training.  

Based on these selected datasets, a base preprocessed dataset (mostly with the data from 2020) will be prepared and made available to the participants as a starter package along with a codebook in Dutch and English. This preprocessed file includes only our target group – people aged 18-45 in 2020 (more than 6 million people). Participants will be able to calculate additional variables based on the full longitudinal datasets and also add characteristics of their networks, using the network datasets for the linkage. The scripts with examples of how to preprocess the network datasets and calculate variables about the structure and composition of one’s networks will be provided. To allow adding the characteristics of the network and because in this phase participants will submit predictions (not only the code), only the outcome variable for the test set is held out (see the figure below).  

Additional CBS datasets (not initially available to the participants of the challenge) can be requested throughout the challenge with a short justification of why the dataset is requested. The relevant CBS datasets can be searched using the CBS [micro-data catalogue](https://www.cbs.nl/nl-nl/onze-diensten/maatwerk-en-microdata/microdata-zelf-onderzoek-doen/catalogus-microdata){target="_blank"} and [ODISSEI portal](https://portal.odissei.nl/){target="_blank"}. Data from external sources (not included in the CBS datasets) that can be linked to groups of individuals can also be uploaded if approved by CBS – for example, welfare policies by municipality.   

__NB:__ because the access to the CBS data is governed by strict rules and regulations in relation to data protection and privacy, only a limited number of participants (10-20 teams, one person per team), selected to participate in [Phase 2](/details/overview/3phases.md){target="_blank"}, will get access to the CBS data provided that they pass security checks and get approved by CBS. For those participants, the costs of access to the CBS datasets will be covered by ODISSEI. You can read about how teams will be __selected__ to participate in Phase 2 and the __conditions for accessing the CBS data__ [here](/details/overview/4submission_evaluation_winners.md){target="_blank"}.  

Read further:   
- Tips for using the CBS data [to be added]

![](/images/cbs_scheme_gray.jpg)
